docs: add guide for signal queries (#54395)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/signal-queries.md

# Signal queries

> Signal queries are an alternative approach to the queries declared using the `@ContentChild`, `@ContentChildren`, `@ViewChild` or `@ViewChildren` decorators. The new approach exposes query results as signals which means that query results can be composed with other signals (using `computed` or `effect`) and drive change detection. Additionally, the signal-based query system and offers other benefits:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signal queries are an alternative approach to the queries declared using the `@ContentChild`, `@ContentChildren`, `@ViewChild` or `@ViewChildren` decorators. The new approach exposes query results as signals which means that query results can be composed with other signals (using `computed` or `effect`) and drive change detection. Additionally, the signal-based query system offers other benefits:
```

> Signal queries are an alternative approach to the queries declared using the `@ContentChild`, `@ContentChildren`, `@ViewChild` or `@ViewChildren` decorators. The new approach exposes query results as signals which means that query results can be composed with other signals (using `computed` or `effect`) and drive change detection. Additionally, the signal-based query system and offers other benefits:

Author: Restructured to follow the same pattern as control flow docs.

* **Simplified mental model** - the rules around timing of query results availability were simplified - now query results can be accessed as soon as available. This removes the need for the `static` option.
* **Simplified API surface** - `QueryList` is no longer part of the public API - children query results are represented as regular arrays. The `static` option was removed, alongside with the deprecated `emitDistinctChangesOnly`.

> * **Improved type safety** - the number of cases when developers had to deal with the `undefined` query results was reduced: `required` remove the `undefined` from the singular ("child') query types while plural ("children") query results are represented as an array that is empty when there are no results or results are not available yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Improved type safety** - the number of cases when developers had to deal with the `undefined` query results was reduced: `required` removes the `undefined` from the singular ("child') query types while plural ("children") query results are represented as an array that is empty when there are no results or results are not available yet.
```

> * **Improved type inference** - type of results is inferred when using a type predicate or an explicit `read` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Improved type inference** - the type of results is inferred when using a type predicate or an explicit `read` option.
```

> * **Performance** - signal-based queries are re-computed lazily - no matches are collected unless someone explicitly reads query results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* **Lazier updates.** - Angular updates signal-based query results lazily; the framework does no work unless your code explicitly reads the query results.
```
all of the other bullet points start with an adjective, so suggesting to make this one also start with an adjective ("faster" didn't feel accurate, though, since it's not _always_ faster, just lazier)

<div class="alert is-helpful">

> Signal queries are currently in [developer preview](/guide/releases#developer-preview).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Signal queries are in [developer preview](/guide/releases#developer-preview).
```

> API might be adjusted based on users feedback without going through the default deprecation policy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These new APIs might be adjusted based on users feedback without going through the default deprecation policy.
```

> API might be adjusted based on users feedback without going through the default deprecation policy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
APIs may change based on feedback without going through Angular's deprecation cycle.
```

</div>

> ## Overview

Reviewer 3: This section should start with a brief explanation of what "queries" (or at least link to one, but I think that repeating it here is friendlier). You could steal the intro I have on adev: https://angular.dev/guide/components/queries

Author: Shamelessly stolen parts of the adev text, thnx!

> Signal queries expose query results as a reactive signal primitive, which makes it possible integrate those results with other signals (declared by a developer or exposed by the framework). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Signal queries expose query results as a reactive signal primitive, which makes it possible to integrate those results with other signals (declared by a developer or exposed by the framework). 
```

> The underlying query mechanism doesn't change much - conceptually we still create singular "child" or plural "children" queries that target elements in a template (view) or content. The difference is in type of results, the exact timing of the results availability. The authoring format for declaring signal-based queries changed as well: the `viewChild`, `viewChildren`, `contentChild` and `contentChildren` functions used as initializer of class members are automatically recognized by Angular. Example:

Reviewer 3: Similar comment here about defining signal-based queries as a concept of its own

 ```ts
 @Component({template: '<div #el></div><my-component />'})
 export class TestComponent {
   // query by a string predicate  
   divEl = viewChild<ElementRef>('el');       // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>
   divEls = viewChildren<ElementRef>('el');   // Signal<ReadonlyArray<ElementRef>>

   // query by a type predicate
   cmp = viewChild(MyComponent);              // Signal<MyComponent|undefined>
   cmp = viewChildren(MyComponent);           // Signal<ReadonlyArray<MyComponent>>
 }
 ```

## Types of queries and their options

### View queries

View queries can be declared using one of the:

> * `viewChild` function (previously one would use the `@ViewChild` decorator);
> * `viewChildren` function (previously one would use the `@ViewChildren` decorator);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `viewChild` function (previously one would use the `@ViewChild` decorator)
* `viewChildren` function (previously one would use the `@ViewChildren` decorator)
```

Author: Thnx, went with `;` and `.`

The first argument of this function represents a predicate (either a `string` or any injectable `Type`).
The second argument makes it possible to pass additional options. Signal based view queries accept only one option: `read`. The `read` option indicates the type of result to retrieve from the matched nodes and return in the final results. 

Example:

```ts
 @Component({
    template: `
        <div #el></div>
        <my-component #cmp />
        @if (show) {
            <div #el></div>
        }
    `
})
export class TestComponent {
    show = true;

    // query by a string predicate  
    divEl = viewChild<ElementRef>('el');            // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>

    // query by a type predicate
    cmp = viewChild(MyComponent);                   // Signal<MyComponent|undefined>

    // query by a type with the read option
    cmp = viewChild('cmp', {read: MyComponent});    // Signal<MyComponent|undefined>

    // query for multiple results
    divEls = viewChildren<ElementRef>('el');        // Signal<ReadonlyArray<ElementRef>>
}
 ```

### Content queries

Content queries can be declared using one of the:

> * `contentChild` function (previously one would use the `@ContentChild` decorator);
> * `contentChildren` function (previously one would use the `@ContentChildren` decorator);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `contentChild` function (previously one would use the `@ContentChild` decorator)
* `contentChildren` function (previously one would use the `@ContentChildren` decorator)
```

The first argument of this function represents a predicate (either a `string` or any injectable `Type`).
The second argument makes it possible to pass additional options:
* `descendants` if true include all descendants of the element. If false then only query direct children of the element.
* `read` indicates the type of result to retrieve from the matched nodes and return in the final results.

Example:

```ts
 @Component({...})
 export class TestComponent {
    // query by a string predicate  
    headerEl = contentChild<ElementRef>('h');                    // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>

    // query by a type predicate
    header = contentChild(MyHeader);                             // Signal<MyHeader|undefined>

    // query by a type with options
    cmp = contentChild('cmp', {read: MyComponent, descendants: false});    // Signal<MyComponent|undefined>

    // query for multiple results
    divEls = contentChildren<ElementRef>('h');                  // Signal<ReadonlyArray<ElementRef>>
 }
 ```

## Results availability and timing

### Required queries and results availability

> The new signal query authoring functions will be executed as part of the directive instance construction. This happens before we could create a query instance and execute template’s creation mode to collect any matches.  As the consequence, there is a period of time where the signal instance was created (and can be read) but no query results could have been collected. By default Angular will return `undefined` (for child queries) or an empty array (for children queries) before results are available. Because of this "query undefined" period oif time, the child queries should have a signal that could potentially return `undefined`. Most of the time, and especially for the view child queries, developers authored their code such that:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new signal query authoring functions will be executed as part of the directive instance construction. This happens before we could create a query instance and execute template’s creation mode to collect any matches.  As a consequence, there is a period of time where the signal instance was created (and can be read) but no query results could have been collected. By default Angular will return `undefined` (for child queries) or an empty array (for children queries) before results are available. Because of this "query undefined" period oif time, the child queries should have a signal that could potentially return `undefined`. Most of the time, and especially for the view child queries, developers authored their code such that:
```

* there is at least one matching result;
* results are accessed when the template was processed and query results are available.

> For such cases child queries may be marked as required to indicate presence of result and, as a consequence, remove he need for the `undefined` in the result type signature. If this contract is violated a signal representing query result will throw a runtime exception.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For such cases child queries may be marked as required to indicate presence of result and, as a consequence, remove the need for the `undefined` in the result type signature. If this contract is violated a signal representing a query result will throw a runtime exception.
```

Example:

```ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  template: `
    <div #requiredEl></div>
    @if (show) {
        <div #conditionalEl></div>
    }
  `,
})
export class App {
  
  reqEl = viewChild.required('requiredEl'); // required result
  condEl = viewChild('conditionalEl');      // optional result (default)
  

  constructor() {
    // creation mode of the template didn't run yet, we couldn't collect results, the value of the signal is undefined
    console.log('constructor:', this.condEl());

    // but accessing a required query in a constructor would throw!
    // this.reqEl(); => ERROR
  }

  ngAfterViewInit() {
    // query results are fully collected, the value of the optional and required signals point to the div's ElementRef
    console.log('ngAfterViewInit:', this.reqEl(), this.condEl());
  }
}

```

### Recomputing queries

Signal-based query results are lazy, computed on demand. This means that query results are not collected unless there is a code path that reads the signal. 

> Query results might change over time in response to the view manipulation - either thorough the Angular's control flow (`@if`, `@for` etc.) or by the direct calls to the `ViewContainerRef` API. This means that reads of the signal representing query results might yield different values over time. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Query results might change over time due to view manipulation - either through Angular's control flow (`@if`, `@for` etc.) or by direct calls to the `ViewContainerRef` API. This means that reads of the signal representing query results might yield different values over time. 
```

# Signal queries

A component or directive can define queries that find child elements and read values from their injectors.

Developers most commonly use queries to retrieve references to components, directives, DOM elements, and more.

There are two categories of query: view queries and content queries.

> Signal queries expose query results as a reactive signal primitive, which makes it possible to integrate and compose those results with other signals. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Signal queries supply query results as a reactive signal primitive. You can use query results in `computed` and `effect`, composing these results with other signals. 
```
probably also linking `computed` and `effect`

APIs may change based on feedback without going through Angular's deprecation cycle.
</div>

If you're already familiar with Angular queries, you can jump straight to [Comparing signal-based queries to decorator-based queries](#comparing-signal-based-queries-to-decorator-based-queries)

## View queries

View queries retrieve results from the elements in the component's own template (view). 

### `viewChild`

You can declare a query targeting a single result with the `viewChild` function. 

```ts
@Component({
    template: `
        <div #el></div>
        <my-component />
    `
})
export class TestComponent {
    // query for a single result by a string predicate  
    divEl = viewChild<ElementRef>('el');       // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>
    // query for a single result by a type predicate
    cmp = viewChild(MyComponent);              // Signal<MyComponent|undefined>
}
```

### `viewChildren`

You can also query for multiple results with the `viewChildren` function. 

```ts
 @Component({
    template: `
        <div #el></div>
        @if (show) {
            <div #el></div>
        }
    `
})
export class TestComponent {
    show = true;

    // query for multiple results

>     divEls = viewChildren<ElementRef>('el');        // Signal<ReadonlyArray<ElementRef>>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    divEls = viewChildren<ElementRef>('el');        // Signal<readonly ElementRef[]>
```
maybe easier to read?

Author: This reflect the actual type in the code so maybe let's leave as-is?

}
 ```

### View query options

> The `viewChild` and the `viewChildren` query declaration functions have a similar signature accepting 2 arguments:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `viewChild` and the `viewChildren` query declaration functions have a similar signature accepting two arguments:
```
nit: numbers ten or less should be written out in text

> * a **predicate** to specify the query target - it can be either a `string` or any injectable `Type`;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* a **locator** to specify the query target - it can be either a `string` or any injectable `Type`;
```
This should be `locator`, no? A predicate is a function a that returns a boolean value

> * a **predicate** to specify the query target - it can be either a `string` or any injectable `Type`;

Reviewer 3: Is `` `Type` `` accurate here? Would it not be any injection token?

Author: yeh, it can be an injection token, let's drop `Type` - thnx!

* a set of **options**  to adjust behavior of a given query.

> Signal based view queries accept only one option: `read`. The `read` option indicates the type of result to inject from the matched nodes and return in the final results. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Signal-based view queries accept only one option: `read`. The `read` option indicates the type of result to inject from the matched nodes and return in the final results. 
```

```ts
@Component({
    template: `<my-component/>`
})
export class TestComponent {
    // query for a single result with options
    cmp = viewChild(MyComponent, {read: ElementRef});   // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>
}
```

## Content queries

Content queries retrieve results from the elements in the component's content — the elements nested inside the component tag in the template where it's used. 

### `contentChild`

You can query for a single result with the `contentChild` function. 

```ts
 @Component({...})
 export class TestComponent {
    // query by a string predicate  
    headerEl = contentChild<ElementRef>('h');                    // Signal<ElementRef|undefined>

    // query by a type predicate
    header = contentChild(MyHeader);                             // Signal<MyHeader|undefined>
 }
 ```

 ### `contentChildren`

You can also query for multiple results with the `contentChildren` function. 

```ts
 @Component({...})
 export class TestComponent {
    // query for multiple results

>     divEls = contentChildren<ElementRef>('h');                  // Signal<ReadonlyArray<ElementRef>>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    divEls = contentChildren<ElementRef>('h');                  // Signal<readonly ElementRef[]>
```
same as above

 }
 ```

### Content query options

> The `contentChild` and the `contentChildren` query declaration functions have a similar signature accepting 2 arguments:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `contentChild` and the `contentChildren` query declaration functions have a similar signature accepting two arguments:
```

> * a **predicate** to specify the query target - it can be either a `string` or any injectable `Type`;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* a **locator** to specify the query target - it can be either a `string` or any injectable `Type`;
```

* a set of **options**  to adjust behavior of a given query.

Content queries accept the following options:

> * `descendants` By default, content queries find only direct children of the component and do not traverse into descendants. If this option is changed to `true`, query results will include all descendants of the element. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* `descendants` By default, content queries find only direct children of the component and do not traverse into descendants. If this option is changed to `true`, query results will include all descendants of the element. Even when `true`, however, queries _never_ descend into components.
```
Maybe add a note here that queries never traverse through component boundaries

Author: Yep, good callout, thnx!

* `read` indicates the type of result to retrieve from the matched nodes and return in the final results.

### Required child queries

> If a child query (`viewChild` or `contentChild`) does not find a result, its value is `undefined`. This may occur if the target element is hidden by Angular's control flow (`@if`, `@for` etc.).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a child query (`viewChild` or `contentChild`) does not find a result, its value is `undefined`. This may occur if the target element is hidden by a control flow statement like`@if` or `@for`.
```

> Because of this, the child queries return a signal that could potentially have the `undefined` value. Most of the time, and especially for the view child queries, developers author their code such that:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Because of this, the child queries return a signal that potentially have the `undefined` value. Most of the time, and especially for the view child queries, developers author their code such that:
```

* there is at least one matching result;
* results are accessed when the template was processed and query results are available.

> For such cases you can mark child queries as `required` and indicate presence of at least one matching result. As a consequence for the `undefined` can be removed from the result type signature. `required` queries are a contract between a component and a template author. If this contract is violated, a signal representing query results will throw a runtime exception.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For such cases, you can mark child queries as `required` to enforce presence of at least one matching result. This eliminates `undefined` from the result type signature. If a `required` query does not find any results, Angular throws an error.
```
I might suggest dropping the sentence talking about the contract since it's maybe more academic than necessary here.

Author: Yep, this reads better, thnx!

```ts
@Component({
  selector: 'app-root',
  standalone: true,
  template: `
    <div #requiredEl></div>
  `,
})
export class App {
  existingEl = viewChild.required('requiredEl');     // required and existing result
  missingEl = viewChild.required('notInATemplate'); // required but NOT existing result
  
  ngAfterViewInit() {
    console.log(this.existingEl()); // OK :-)

>     console.log(this.missingEl());  // Runtime exception: result marked as required by not available! 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    console.log(this.missingEl());  // Runtime error: result marked as required by not available! 
```
nit: I try to prefer "error" over "exception" when talking about JavaScript

  }
}
```

## Results availability timing

A signal query authoring functions will be executed as part of the directive instance construction. This happens before we could create a query instance and execute the template’s creation mode to collect any matches. As a consequence, there is a period of time where the signal instance was created (and can be read) but no query results could have been collected. By default Angular will return `undefined` (for child queries) or an empty array (for children queries) before results are available. Required queries will throw if accessed at this point.

> Signal-based query results are lazy, computed on demand. This means that query results are not collected unless there is a code path that reads the signal. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Angular computes signal-based query results lazily, on demand. This means that query results are not collected unless there is a code path that reads the signal. 
```
nit: passive voice

> Query results might change over time due to the view manipulation - either through the Angular's control flow (`@if`, `@for` etc.) or by the direct calls to the `ViewContainerRef` API. This means that reads of the signal representing query results might have different values over time. 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Query results can change over time due to the view manipulation - either through the Angular's control flow (`@if`, `@for` etc.) or by the direct calls to the `ViewContainerRef` API. When you read the value from the query result signal, you can receive different values over time. 

```

> Note: to prevent reading of partial query results as a template is rendered, we will not return matches until the rendering of a given template completes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note: to avoid returning incomplete query results while a template is rendered, Angular delays query resolution until it finishes rendering a given template.
```
nit: avoid "I" and "we" in guides

## Query declarations functions and the associated rules

> The `viewChild`, `contentChild`, `viewChildren` and `contentChildren` functions are special - those are marker function recognized by the Angular compiler. You can use those functions to declare queries by initializing a component or a directive property. Calling those functions in other places, outside of a component's property initialization is _not_ supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `viewChild`, `contentChild`, `viewChildren` and `contentChildren` functions are special function recognized by the Angular compiler. You can use those functions to declare queries by initializing a component or a directive property. You can never call these functions outside of component and directive property initializers.
```

  constructor() {
    const myConst = viewChild('el'); // NOT SUPPORTED
  }
}
```

## Comparing signal-based queries to decorator-based queries

Signal queries are an alternative approach to the queries declared using the `@ContentChild`, `@ContentChildren`, `@ViewChild` or `@ViewChildren` decorators. The new approach exposes query results as signals which means that query results can be composed with other signals (using `computed` or `effect`) and drive change detection. Additionally, the signal-based query system offers other benefits:

* **More predictable timing.** You can access query results as soon as they're available.
* **Simpler API surface.** All queries return a signal, and queries with more than one result let you work with a standard array.
* **Improved type safety.**  Fewer query use cases include `undefined` in the possible results.
* **More accurate type inference.** TypeScript can infer more accurate types when you use a type predicate or when you specify an explicit `read` option.
* **Lazier updates.** - Angular updates signal-based query results lazily; the framework does no work unless your code explicitly reads the query results.

> The underlying query mechanism doesn't change much - conceptually we still create singular "child" or plural "children" queries that target elements in a template (view) or content. The difference is in type of results, the exact timing of the results availability. The authoring format for declaring signal-based queries changed as well: the `viewChild`, `viewChildren`, `contentChild` and `contentChildren` functions used as initializer of class members are automatically recognized by Angular. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The underlying query mechanism doesn't change much - conceptually Angular still creates singular "child" or plural "children" queries that target elements in a template (view) or content. The difference is in type of results and the exact timing of the results availability. The authoring format for declaring signal-based queries changed as well: the `viewChild`, `viewChildren`, `contentChild` and `contentChildren` functions used as initializer of class members are automatically recognized by Angular. 
```
